---
title: Hipcheck 3.8.0 Release
authors:
  - Andrew Lilley Brinker
extra:
  author_img: "images/authors/andrew.jpg"
---

Hipcheck 3.8.0 is out, with a completed transition to our new plugin system,
and a lot of polish for the plugin user experience.

<!-- more -->

---

## End of a Half-Measure

In 3.6.2, we launched the initial version of Hipcheck's new plugin system!
This is a new mechanism that enables anyone to add support for new data sources
and new analyses.

As part of the move to plugins in 3.6.2, we introduced a "policy file"
format, written with KDL syntax, and began to phase out the older "configuration
file" written in TOML. You could (and can still in 3.8.0) continue to use
the TOML file, though you get a warning, and under the hood this TOML file
is converted to the KDL format.

In the KDL policy file, you specify plugins to run with a "plugin specifier"
that looks like `mitre/activity`, or more generally `<publisher>/<plugin>`. From
3.6.2 to 3.7.0, any of the existing analyses which can be built into Hipcheck
were exposed as `mitre`-namespaced plugins in the policy file.

However, under the hood, these did _not_ actually run those analyses _as
plugins_, but rather continued to run code that was built in to Hipcheck. Even
at the time, we knew this was a half measure to get the initial support for
plugins out into the wild while we continued to work on splitting existing
data sources and analyses out.

With 3.8.0, that splitting-out is complete! There are no more built in analyses
or data sources in Hipcheck. This is good news, both for making the `hc` binary
itself smaller, _and_ because it means we no longer privilege plugins made
by the Hipcheck team! They run with the same Rust plugin SDK we make available
to anyone who wants to write a Hipcheck plugin.

This dog-fooding of our own SDK and plugin API also helped us to identify both
bugfixes and future improvements to make.

## New Plugins

| Plugin Name         | Top-Level? | Download Manifest Location |
|:--------------------|:-----------|:---------------------------|
| `mitre/activity`    | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/affiliation` | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/binary`      | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/churn`       | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/entropy`     | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/fuzz`        | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/git`         | -          | TODO                       |
| `mitre/github`      | -          | TODO                       |
| `mitre/identity`    | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/linguist`    | -          | TODO                       |
| `mitre/npm`         | -          | TODO                       |
| `mitre/review`      | Yes        | TODO                       |
| `mitre/typo`        | Yes        | TODO                       |

TODO: Explain what "top-level" means, what the download link is for, and how
to use these new plugins.

## Changelogs

### `hc`

- Add `patch` field to policy files
- Introduce clear schema for `target` for default queries
- Add support for specifying local plugins
- Add support for datetimes and spans in policy expressions

### `hipcheck-sdk` Rust Crate

- Add ability to mock query responses for testing.
- Add concern reporting support for queries.
- FIX: Ensure the SDK sends error messages over gRPC in addition to logging them.
