---
title: Hipcheck 3.11.0 Release
authors:
  - Julian Lanson
extra:
  author_img: "images/authors/julian.png"
---

The Hipcheck 3.11.0 release features a variety of quality-of-life improvements
for users, especially around reporting and diagnosing configuration errors. This
includes an overhauled `hc ready` command, better configuration error types and
printed error messages, updates to english-language analysis explanations, a
more informative JSON output format, and more. This release also features
multiple internal refactors and CI updates described in a separate subsection
for those interested.

<!-- more -->

---

## User-facing Improvements

### 🔍&nbsp;&nbsp;Plugin Configuration Error Reporting

#### `hc ready` Upgrade

With Hipcheck 3.11.0, [hc ready][hc_ready] now expects a policy file and behaves
like an `hc check` dry-run; it starts and configures plugins but does not
proceed to analysis.

The `hc ready` subcommand was first written before Hipcheck transitioned to a
plugin architecture. At that time, we knew every possible analysis and their
requirements (including additional configuration files, expected binaries and
environment variables, etc.). Thus, `hc ready` could be hard-coded to check
those requirements. In the new plugin-based context, the set of analyses that
Hipcheck will run depends on the input policy file, which may involve
third-party analysis plugins with unknown requirements.  Hipcheck's "readiness"
is now directly dependent on the readiness of the plugins a user will employ in
a given analysis; we are in turn defining a plugin's "readiness" as whether it
successfully completes the configuration step. We encourage plugin developers to
use this step to do all necessary file parsing and environment checking, and not
to report configuration success unless your criteria are met.

#### Better Configuration Error Reporting

With the above changes, `hc ready` now informs us if the configuration of a
plugin (based on the supplied policy file) failed. To help users better
understand and address configuration errors that may arise, we made the
following additional changes. Firstly, for transparency Hipcheck now prints the
name and version of the plugins that failed configuration. We also expanded the
range of configuration error types that plugins can report, so that plugin
authors can be more clear to users about what caused the failure. This change is
reflected in the `ConfigurationStatus` enum, part of our gRPC protocol
definition at `hipcheck-common/proto/hipcheck/v1/hipcheck.proto`. The new errors
are as follows:

```
// The plugin encountered an internal error, probably due to incorrect assumptions.
CONFIGURATION_STATUS_INTERNAL_ERROR = 5;

// A necessary plugin input file was not found.
CONFIGURATION_STATUS_FILE_NOT_FOUND = 6;

// The plugin's input data could not be parsed correctly.
CONFIGURATION_STATUS_PARSE_ERROR = 7;

// An environment variable needed by the plugin was not set.
CONFIGURATION_STATUS_ENV_VAR_NOT_SET = 8;

// The plugin could not find or run a needed program.
CONFIGURATION_STATUS_MISSING_PROGRAM = 9;
```

The suite of plugins maintained by the Hipcheck team has been updated to make
use of these new error types where appropriate. Finally, using the `miette`
crate we have updated our plugins that do file parsing to return high-fidelity
parsing error messages that show where in the file the error arose and suggest
fixes.

### 📝&nbsp;&nbsp;JSON-formatted Analysis Reporting

Users can select between having Hipcheck emit its analysis report in a
human-readable format or as a JSON file using the `--format` flag. Previously,
the JSON format was not at information-parity with the shell output. With
Hipcheck 3.11.0 we have addressed this deficiency and the two formats are mostly
equal in expressiveness. The default JSON output (`--format json`) reports only
an abridged version of each plugin's raw analysis output to prioritize report
readability. If users are interested in a JSON output file with each plugin's
raw output (i.e.  before converted to a pass/fail determination with the policy
expression), they can use the new `--format debug` option.

Internally, the `ReportBuilder` structure that Hipcheck previously used to build
the shell output has been eliminated; now, shell output is produced using a
[mini-jinja][mini_jinja] template applied to the JSON output, which simplifies
the internals for report generation while also making future reporting
improvements easier.

### ✏️ &nbsp;&nbsp;English-language Policy Explanations Changes

In Hipcheck 3.10.0 we introduced code to attempt to "explain" why analysis
output failed when a particular policy expression was applied to it (while
policy expressions are powerful, they can be difficult to read and understand
why an analysis reported a failed determination). In this release, we have
expanded these generated explanations to cover successful analyses as well.

Furthermore, we improved our detection of expressions that calculate
percentages and the printing of percent-like floats. We also improved our
explanation of expressions using the `(count $)` function, and updated span
types to be expressed in number of days.

Together, these improvements should make explanations of failed analyses
clearer, and we will continue to work on more improvements going forward.

### 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;Smaller User-facing Improvements

- In general, we have found MacOS environments are more likely to need a higher
	`backoff-interval` for plugin startup. This can be achieved with a custom
	`Exec.kdl` config file, but we decided to simply make the in-memory default
	`Exec.kdl` be more OS-aware by starting at a higher `backoff-interval` in
	MacOS environments. We hope this will make it less likely that Mac users
	disproportionately need to reach for a custom `Exec.kdl`.

- We added a line to the `hc check` output that displays where the policy for
	the current execution came from. Between the policy-file- vs. (deprecated)
	config-folder-based executions and the use of environment variables and
	system defaults to derive the policy source, we wanted to ensure Hipcheck is
	transparent with the user about where the policy came from.

## 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;Internal Changes

### ➡️ &nbsp;&nbsp;Salsa v3 Migration

Hipcheck uses the function output memoization crate `salsa` to eliminate
redundant queries to plugins. Prior to the plugin architecture transition, we
used `salsa` to memoize many more extraneous things that are now obsolete. With
Hipcheck 3.11.0 we have cleared out the last remnants of our non-query `salsa`
usage, stripping it down to where it is most relevant and impactful.

Furthermore, since `salsa` stopped releasing on `crates.io`, it has undergone at
least two major refactors; for this release, we have forked the `salsa` GitHub
repo to get access to the latest refactor in a way we can control so if future
upstream changes would break our code we can continue targeting a commit that
works for us. We refactored our query memoization for the new API and are now
up-to-date with Salsa v3!

### 📤&nbsp;&nbsp;CI Pipeline Quality-of-Life

We made a variety of small-to-medium sized changes to the CI workflow for PRs to help the development
team catch bugs and speed up release builds. These changes include:

- Changing our set of CI runners to match the set of architectures that we
	officially support.
- Using GitHub merge queues to catch bugs that would occur only once a PR is
	merged into main before they happen, and to simplify the workflow for
	updating PRs with requested changes.
- Adjusting releases using [dist][dist] to only build the target crate instead of the
	entire workspace, significantly cutting down release build times.
- Expanding the set of paths to which changes cause the build and test workflow
	to include more supporting crates.
- We now run full `hc check` analyses in CI instead of just unit tests.

### 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;Miscellaneous Changes

- With the query batching feature we introduced in Hipcheck 3.10.0, we have been
	able to strip out redundant code in the `mitre/churn` and `mitre/entropy`
	plugins and have them query `mitre/linguist` instead to find out which files
	in a repository qualify as source code.
- We consolidated the [kdl][kdl] parsing code used by multiple plugins and Hipcheck
	core into an internal `hipcheck-kdl` crate.

## 🗺️&nbsp;&nbsp;How to Get Involved

We're always looking for new contributors! If you'd like to learn more about
Hipcheck and get involved in contributing, please checkout our
[Roadmap][Roadmap] and feel free to get in touch with us through our
[Discussions] board!

## ⭐️&nbsp;&nbsp;Thank You to Our Contributors and Supporters

As always, we want to say a big "Thank you!" to everyone who supports the
project at MITRE, to CISA for [sponsoring our current work on it][cisa_hipcheck],
to our prior government sponsors who have helped advance Hipcheck, and to
everyone who has contributed, given feedback, or encouraged us in building it.

The following team members contributed to this release:

- [Julian Lanson](https://github.com/j-lanson)
- [Michael Chernicoff](https://github.com/mchernicoff)
- [Patrick Casey](https://github.com/patrickjcasey)
- [Aisha Mohammed](https://github.com/aamohd)
- [Nino Agrawal](https://github.com/ninaagrawal)
- [Kirill Usubyan](https://github.com/KirilldogU)
- [Devin Lake](https://github.com/devin-b-lake)
- [Cal Stepanian](https://github.com/cstepanian)

[hc_ready]: @/docs/guide/cli/hc-ready.md
[dist]: https://github.com/axodotdev/cargo-dist
[kdl]: https://kdl.dev/
[cisa_hipcheck]: https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/continued-progress-towards-secure-open-source-ecosystem
[mini_jinja]: https://github.com/mitsuhiko/minijinja
[Roadmap]: https://github.com/orgs/mitre/projects/33/views/15
[Discussions]: https://github.com/mitre/hipcheck/discussions
