---
title: Hipcheck 3.10.0 Release
authors:
  - Andrew Lilley Brinker
extra:
  author_img: "images/authors/andrew.jpg"
---

The Hipcheck team has released version 3.10.0. This release features two
improvements to the "query protocol" that defines how plugins in Hipcheck
communicate, a new `env` macro for policy files, and a start on human-readable
explanations when a package doesn't pass policy.

<!-- more -->

For the unfamiliar, Hipcheck is a tool to help open source software users
decide what dependencies to use by applying their own policies with
*maximum configurability*.

## Hipcheck

### Query Protocol Improvements

This release features two major improvements to the "query protocol." This is
the protocol that defines how plugins communicate with `hc` (what we often call
"Hipcheck Core").

This communication works as follows:

1. `hc` starts each plugin as a subprocess, and the plugin starts listening for
   gRPC calls on a specified port, acting as a gRPC server with `hc` as its
   client.
2. After some setup, `hc` initiates a bidirectional streaming RPC call, over
   which query messages will be sent.

The rules for how `hc` and plugins encapsulate queries to send and receive
messages form the "query protocol."

In [RFD #9][rfd_9] and [RFD #10][rfd_10], we defined two modifications to this
protocol, batched queries and submit chunking:

- [__Batched Queries__][rfd_9]: Previously, each query message could contain at
  most one complete query, either a single query that fit in one messages, or a
  large query split across multiple messages. However, sometimes a query's
  request or response data are small, in which case paying the overhead of a
  full gRPC messages every time can start to become a burden. To resolve this,
  we introduced support for "batched queries," so a single message can
  contain more than one query at a time.
- [__Submit Chunking__][rfd_10]: While we've always supported splitting large
  query responses across multiple messages, we'd missed including that same
  support for chunking when sending a query request. This causes failures on
  some large repositories, like the Linux repository, where the large number of
  commits would cause some queries requests based on commit hashes to exceed
  the gRPC message size limit. This is now fixed, and query requests can be
  chunked in the same way responses can be.

This fix involved backwards-compatible changes to the protobuf definitions
for the gRPC protocol, along with updates to `hc` and to our Rust SDK, which
is used by all of our first-party plugins.

### `#env` Macro for Policy Files

[Policy files][policy_files] are how users specify what analyses to run on
packages they want to assess, and how those analyses should be configured.

Sometimes in a policy file it's convenient to incorporate data pulled from an
environment variable, to make it easier to modify the policy applied in a
more dynamic fashion than updating the file by hand.

We've now added support for a new `#env` macro in policy files, which reads the
specified environment variable and injects the result of that environment
variable at runtime into the policy file.

Use of the new macro looks like:

```kdl
analysis "some/plugin" {
    api-token #env("SOME_VARIABLE")
}
```

### English-Language Policy Explanations

One of our ongoing goals for Hipcheck is to make it easy to use for everyone.
We want this to be a tool that empowers regular users of open source software.
As part of that, previously when an analysis failed we could print the
policy expression specified for that analysis, and an explanation of what that
analysis is trying to validate as provided by the plugin creator.

With this new version, we can now also in some cases produce a human-readable
explanation of the policy expression that failed, helping to make it clearer
_why_ a package hasn't passed a specific policy.

This an early stage change, and one we expect to continue iterating on it
subsequent versions.

### Other Improvements

- We introduced a new `Exec.kdl` file, as an initial experiment in letting
  users tune the internal performance characteristics of Hipcheck.
- We fixed a bug with the `#rel` macro in policy files, causing it to produce
  invalid paths on Windows.
- We modified how `hc setup` works, to fill out a starter set of policy files
  without needing to download a bundle from the network.

## Rust SDK

As described in "Query Protocol Improvements" above, we've introduced support
for query batching and submit chunking, both of which involved changes to the
Rust SDK. The submit chunking change is entirely internal and does not
introduce new APIs. The query batching support is now exposed via two new
APIs on `hipcheck_sdk::PluginEngine`:

- `PluginEngine::batch`: This returns a `QueryBuilder`, letting you build up
  a set of queries to include in a batch incrementally.
- `PluginEngine::batch_query`: Expects a `Vec` of query keys, enabling you to
  make many queries together at once.

We also added more documentation to the crate and cleaned up some organization
to hopefully be clearer / easier to navigate.

## Plugins

All plugins have been updated to the latest version of the Rust SDK, meaning
they now support submit chunking and perform query batching where appropriate.

The `mitre/git` plugin now has a configurable commit cache size, as it performs
some internal data caching.

Finally, we transitioned all remaining configuration files expected by
individual plugins from TOML to KDL. If you're still using the old TOML files
they should continue to work, through we recommend starting with the KDL files
that are now distributed with the default starter policy from `hc setup`.

## Conclusion

That's it for Hipcheck 3.10.0! As always, we greatly appreciate the hard work
of everyone involved in the project who contributed to this release. I
especially want to thank Julian Lanson for continuing to lead development and
for shepherding this release to completion.

Thanks as well to CISA for their continued support of our work on Hipcheck.

The following team members contributed to this release:

- [Julian Lanson](https://github.com/j-lanson)
- [Michael Chernicoff](https://github.com/mchernicoff)
- [Patrick Casey](https://github.com/patrickjcasey)
- [Aisha Mohammed](https://github.com/aamohd)
- [Nino Agrawal](https://github.com/ninaagrawal)
- [Kirill Usubyan](https://github.com/KirilldogU)
- [Devin Lake](https://github.com/devin-b-lake)
- [Cal Stepanian](https://github.com/cstepanian)

[rfd_9]: @/docs/rfds/0009-batch-queries.md
[rfd_10]: @/docs/rfds/0010-submit-chunking.md
[policy_files]: @/docs/guide/config/policy-file.md
