---
title: Hipcheck 3.14.0 Release
authors:
  - Andrew Lilley Brinker
extra:
  author_img: "images/authors/andrew.jpg"
---

Hipcheck 3.14.0 is out! This is a relatively minor release, with one new
feature, two bugfixes, and an assortment of dependency updates.

<!-- more -->

---

## 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;New Features

### 💬&nbsp;&nbsp;New `explain semver` subcommand

Hipcheck supports using _constraints_ on SemVer types when specifying plugin
dependencies. It does this with a list of custom operators, adopted from the
operators supported by Cargo, the Rust build tool and package manager. However,
for backwards-compatibility reasons, Hipcheck's operators do not exactly match
Cargo's.

To make it easier to debug and clarify the meaning of SemVer operators, we've
added a new subcommand `hc explain semver` which takes in SemVer operators and
outputs their equivalent formulation with only less than and greater than
comparators.

If you're ever uncertain about how to interpret SemVer operators in the context
of Hipcheck, we recommend using this new command.

## 🪲&nbsp;&nbsp;Bugfixes

### Stop Checking for `npm` during initialization

Previously, when all analyses were built into Hipcheck itself, we'd need to
use a local install of `npm`, the popular JavaScript package manager, to
support the JavaScript-specific analysis for typosquatting detection. To do
that, we'd check for the presence of `npm` during the initialization process of
Hipcheck, one of the earliest things we do during startup.

When we moved all analyses out into distinct plugins, we still unintentionally
retained that check for `npm`. We've now removed it, since it's no longer a
requirement for running Hipcheck itself.

### Fix the JSON format for `errored` analyses

Hipcheck reports can be given in JSON format, and in that format we split out
analyses between successful, failed, and "errored" analyses. Errored analyses
are analyses which failed to run to completion due to an error. In the JSON
output, the format of these analyses specifically was very different from the
format of other analyses, in a way that limited their usefulness and made
parsing more complex. Their format has now been modified to be more in line
with passing and failed analyses.

## 🗺️&nbsp;&nbsp;How to Get Involved

We're always looking for new contributors! If you'd like to learn more about
Hipcheck and get involved in contributing, please checkout our
[Roadmap][Roadmap] and feel free to get in touch with us through our
[Discussions] board!

## ⭐️&nbsp;&nbsp;Thank You to Our Contributors and Supporters

As always, we want to say a big "Thank you!" to everyone who supports the
project at MITRE, to our prior government sponsors who have helped advance
Hipcheck, and to everyone who has contributed, given feedback, or encouraged us
in building it.

The following people contributed to this release:

- [Andrew Lilley Brinker (MITRE)](https://github.com/alilleybrinker)
- [Scott Hissam (SEI)](https://github.com/sei-shissam)

[Roadmap]: https://github.com/orgs/mitre/projects/33/views/15
[Discussions]: https://github.com/mitre/hipcheck/discussions
[cisa_hipcheck]: https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/continued-progress-towards-secure-open-source-ecosystem
