---
title: Hipcheck 3.9.1 Release
authors:
  - Julian Lanson
extra:
  author_img: "images/authors/julian.png"
---

Hipcheck 3.9.1 introduces some bugfixes related to the auto-installer and binary
releases, as well as some improvements to target resolution.

<!-- more -->

---

## 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;Installation and Containerization Fixes

Thanks to an [issue][container_issue] submitted by [Aeva Black], we were made
aware that running Hipcheck in our official Containerfile was not as
effortless as we would like. Investigation of this issue led to further
realization that key values used in installer script generation had not been
updated in a couple versions, and so our installers shipped with versions
`3.8.0` and `3.9.0` were still pulling down Hipcheck `3.7.0`.

This release addresses the above issues, the installer with this release will
properly download Hipcheck `3.9.1`.

## 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;Policy File Support for Relative Paths

The other main reason binary installations were not running properly was because
the default policy file that ships with Hipcheck has plugin configurations that
specify relative paths to plugin-specific configuration files.

When a policy file is loaded, the configurations specified for each plugin are
sent to that plugin as-is; the `hc` binary is not expected to understand the
parameters of a particular plugin's configuration at all. This means that
relative paths specified in a plugin's configuration will be interpreted
relative to the running plugin's current working directory, which is the same as
the one from which `hc` was started. This is often nowhere near where the
configuration files are stored.

It has become clear that our policy file needs to be able to specify paths
relative to the policy file itself, which requires `hc` core to do a little more
than basic file format processing. In this release we introduce the `#rel()`
macro for use in policy files, which can be placed around a KDL string (e.g.
`#rel("Binary.toml")`. When `hc` loads a policy from file, it will now run a
pre-processing step to re-interpret the contents of `#rel()` as a path relative
to the directory containing the policy file itself. In this way,
`#rel("Binary.toml")` indicates a file in the same directory as the policy file.
We have applied this macro to the default policy file that releases with
Hipcheck, so now plugins that rely on config files can correctly locate them.

## 📦&nbsp;&nbsp;Target Resolution Refactor

This release also includes the initial implementation of [RFD #5], a refactor of
our target resolution mechanism. While for now the changes are mostly internal,
there are a few improvements for users. Firstly, there is better fuzzy-matching
for finding the git repo tag associated with a given SemVer version string. Even
more exciting, NPM and PyPI packages specified without a version will now cause
Hipcheck to find the repo tag associated with the latest version of that
package. Previously, a user would have to use the `--ref` flag and specify a Git
reference or commit directly if a package version was not provided.

## 🗺️&nbsp;&nbsp;How to Get Involved

We're always looking for new contributors! If you'd like to learn more about
Hipcheck and get involved in contributing, please checkout our [Roadmap] and
feel free to get in touch with us through our [Discussions] board!

## ⭐️&nbsp;&nbsp;Thank You to Our Contributors and Supporters

As always, we want to say a big "Thank you!" to everyone who supports the
project at MITRE, to CISA for [sponsoring our current work on it][cisa_hipcheck],
to our prior government sponsors who have helped advance Hipcheck, and to
everyone who has contributed, given feedback, or encouraged us in building it.

The following team members contributed to this release:

- [Julian Lanson], Hipcheck Development Team Lead at MITRE
- [Aeva Black], Open Source Security Section Chief at CISA
- [Michael Chernicoff], Hipcheck Developer at MITRE
- [Patrick Casey], Hipcheck Developer at MITRE

[container_issue]: https://github.com/mitre/hipcheck/issues/752
[Aeva Black]: https://github.com/AevaOnline
[Julian Lanson]: https://github.com/j-lanson
[Michael Chernicoff]: https://github.com/mchernicoff
[Patrick Casey]: https://github.com/patrickjcasey
[RFD #5]: @/docs/rfds/0005-target-resolution-refactor.md
[Roadmap]: https://github.com/orgs/mitre/projects/33/views/15
[Discussions]: https://github.com/mitre/hipcheck/discussions
[cisa_hipcheck]: https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/continued-progress-towards-secure-open-source-ecosystem
