---
title: Python Plugin SDK Initial Release
authors:
  - Julian Lanson
extra:
  author_img: "images/authors/julian.png"
---

The Hipcheck team is pleased to announce the initial release of our Python
plugin SDK, version 0.2.1!

## 📖&nbsp;&nbsp;Hipcheck Plugin Background

As you may be aware, last year [Hipcheck][hc] transitioned its analysis
subsystem to a plugin-based design. When analyzing a target repo, all of the
analyses Hipcheck runs are now structured as plugins that are fetched, started,
and queried by Hipcheck core. Not only does this allow users to control by
configuration which set of analyses they want to run, but users can now develop
and publish their own data sources or top-level Hipcheck analyses. Since all
plugins use the same communication protocol, Hipcheck core treats user-defined
plugins no differently than those maintained by the Hipcheck team.

Plugins expose one or more endpoints that can be queried. During analysis,
Hipcheck core queries the top-level analyses (specified by the user) by providing
the analysis target. As part of their endpoint logic, plugins may in
turn query other plugins that they have specified as dependencies. One of the
appealing aspects of Hipcheck's modular plugin design is that every query
endpoint just outputs data; we use our policy expression language to let users
define how that data becomes a pass-fail determination. That means any
endpoint's output can be either a top-level analysis, _or_ raw input to a
higher-level plugin. We think this composability will be one of the strengths of
the Hipcheck plugin ecosystem.

## 🐍&nbsp;&nbsp;The Python Plugin SDK

Hipcheck core communicates with plugins over gRPC using a protobuf-defined
protocol. Due to message size limits, there is a certain amount of complex logic
involved in fragmenting and de-fragmenting messages on either side of the gRPC
connection. There are also the matters of turning `.proto` file definitions into
class/struct definitions, and of managing multiple concurrent "query" sessions
between Hipcheck and a given plugin.

Naturally, we don't want everyone writing plugins (including us!) to have to
implement all this logic themselves each time. Late last year we released the
Rust Hipcheck SDK for writing plugins, upon which (currently) all of our
officially maintained plugins depend. The SDK handles all of the communication
and startup messiness, and lets the author focus on the important stuff - the
business logic of the query endpoints.

While we on the Hipcheck team are all happy writing Rust and Rust's popularity
seems to increase steadily, in order to drastically expand the universe of
people able and willing to write Hipcheck plugins, we decided to implement a
second SDK in a more established language. We decided on Python for
its ubiquity, rapid development pace, and large ecosystem of existing tools.
Python being an interpreted and duck-typed language is very unlike Rust, and
would also serve as a good stress test of our protocol logic.

Over the past couple of months we've been working on implementing the Python
plugin SDK, and we are now proud to announce that we have reached feature parity
with the Rust SDK. We are marking `0.2.1` as the first useable release of the
Python SDK on PyPI (we had an older version on PyPI already just to claim the
package name). News of the Python SDK has already been met with excitement from
colleagues who have said they have Python tools they'd love to slot into
Hipcheck plugins, but having to interface with Rust was too big a barrier.

Note that this is not a `1.0.0` release - we still have some minor augmentations
to the `.proto` protocol spec in the works. We think changes to the user-facing
API of the SDK will slight, but plugin authors should be prepared and should not
take this as a commitment to a stable API.

## 🏁&nbsp;&nbsp;Getting Started

If you'd like to get started with the Python SDK:

- You can find the PyPI package [here][pypi-release].
- The SDK API documentation is [here][api-docs].
- The guide for developing a Python plugin is [here][plugin-dev].

[hc]: https://hipcheck.mitre.org/
[pypi-release]: https://pypi.org/project/hipcheck-sdk/
[api-docs]: https://hipcheck.mitre.org/sdk/python/hipcheck_sdk.html
[plugin-dev]: https://hipcheck.mitre.org/docs/guide/making-plugins/python-sdk/
