---
title: The RFD Process
weight: 0
slug: "0000"
extra:
  rfd: "0"
  primary_author: Andrew Lilley Brinker
  primary_author_link: https://github.com/alilleybrinker
  status: Accepted
  pr: 24
---

# The RFD Process

__Requests for Discussion__ are documents which describe proposed changes to
Hipcheck to enable discussion and careful consideration before changes are
implemented. They are inspired by processes such as:

- The Rust programming language's [RFC process][rust_rfc].
- The Oxide Computer Company's [RFD process][oxide_rfd].
- The Python programming language's [PEP process][python_pep].
- The OpenJDK project's [JEP process][openjdk_jep].

## Goals of the RFD Process

The primary goal of the Hipcheck RFD process is to enable the team and any
broader interested parties from the open source software ecosystem to
voice concerns, discuss design trade-offs, and reach consensus (or, where
consensus is not possible, a decision as determined by the project's
leadership) which is well informed and considered.

The RFD process also ensures that important decisions about the design,
implementation, and future of Hipcheck are documented for future reference.
Too often in software projects, key decisions are made in individual or
group discussions but not recorded for posterity, or key considerations
are spread across many disparate discussions, making it hard to recover the
full history of how decisions were reached.

RFD's also provide a mechanism to signal when important decisions are
being made, to gather interest and input when it's neededmost.

## What Needs an RFD?

Only _important_ changes should be done with an RFD. Of course, this can
be a vague and difficult term, so let's try to explain it further.

RFDs should be written for changes which involve important API boundaries
or guarantees provided by Hipcheck, to its end users or to plugin authors.
RFDs should also be written when involving changes that cut across large
parts of the Hipcheck codebase, or which seriously impact features Hipcheck
provides for users. If a decision is expected to be contentious, an RFD
should generally be written for it. Finally, if a design is technically
difficult or involves substantial trade-offs which need to be weighed,
an RFD should be written for it.

## What Goes Into an RFD?

RFDs don't have an exact template. They're intended to be prose documents
built around the needs and context of the changes they're proposing.
That said, RFDs should address the following:

- Summarize the proposed change.
- Explain the motivation for the change.
- Provide a more detailed description of the change.
- Explain trade-offs made by the design of the change.
- Explain alternatives and why they're not being pursued.
- Identify any prior art which inspired the change.
- Note unresolved questions relating to the change.

For RFDs which are _not_ describing proposed changes to Hipcheck, but are
instead describing project goals, values, or other non-technical aspects
of the Hipcheck project, any of the above may be ignored as appropriate.

## How are RFDs Added?

RFDs should be added as Pull Requests to the Hipcheck repository, and
will go through the standard Hipcheck contribution process.

Each RFD will be added as a file in the `docs/rfds/` folder, prefixed
with a four-digit number, left-padded with zeroes, increasing from `0001`.
This is the RFD's "RFD ID".

RFDs can be in one of the following states:

- __Proposed__: The RFD exists as an open Pull Request against the Hipcheck
  GitHub repository.
- __Closed__: The RFD Pull Request has been closed without being merged into
  the Hipcheck repository.
- __Accepted__: The RFD has been accepted into the Hipcheck repository, and
  a file for it can now be found in the `docs/rfds/` folder.

Only __Accepted__ RFD's receive RFD IDs. RFDs in the __Proposed__ or
__Closed__ state can be referred to by their Pull Request number.

## Who Can Write an RFD?

Anyone can write an RFD! RFDs are accepted from all contributors, and the
bar for acceptance and incorporation by the project is the same regardless
of who has submitted an RFD.

[rust_rfc]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/
[oxide_rfd]: https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/
[python_pep]: https://peps.python.org/
[openjdk_jep]: https://openjdk.org/jeps/0
